Content-Type: text/x-zim-wiki
Wiki-Format: zim 0.4
Creation-Date: 2019-04-13T20:00:08+05:30

====== Electric current ======
Created Saturday 13 April 2019

What is electricity? Where can you see the effects of electric current in nature? 
What is meant by an electric current? Differentiate between static electricity and current electricity.
How does current flow in a circuit? What do you mean by electric potential and potential difference? 
What is a short circuit? Electric current chooses the path of least resistance.
What is the equation defining electric current. What is the unit?  
What is meant by a conductor of electricity? List some of the good and bad conductors, and insulators.
What is meant by electrical resistance? List the resistance of commons objects found in nature.
Where is electricity produced and how is it transmitted to our homes?
State Ohm's law.
*What are the factors on which the resistance of an object depends on? Motivate.
*Explain the concept of power. Identify the different sources of power around you.
*Derive the formula for the power in terms of the current and voltage.
*State Joule's law of heating.
List the different types of lighting devices in and around your house. 
--------------------
State the lighting effects of electricity.
What are the qualities desirable for heating coils? 
What is the resistance of the human body? (measure)
--------------------
Answers

What is electricity?
Electricity is a form of energy that powers many of the equipments seen in daily life. 

Where can you see the effects of electric current in nature? 
lightning, nerve impulses, static electricity, ECG and EEG.

How does current flow in a circuit? 
From a region of high concentration (potential) to a region of low potential. 
It needs a closed path.
What is a short circuit? Electric current chooses the path of least resistance.

Joule's law
The heat generated in a current carrying conductor is the product of the square of the current in the conductor, the 
resistance of the conductor and the time of flow of current.

The different types of lighting devices which use electricity
1. Incandescent lamps
2. Discharge lamps
3. Fluorescent lamps
4. compact fluorescent lamps
5. LED lamps
6. Arc lamps

__Thus electrical energy is the energy of flowing charges (current). When electricity flows through a wire, heat is produced as a result of the resistance. Light is produced both due to heating and due to discharge. In semiconductor devices such as diodes, light is produced in a different way.__

--------------------
Applications

What is the purpose of a regulator in electrical appliances? 
__*Explain the working of a safety fuse.__
List the different types of lighting sources seen in daily life.
 - halogen lamps, neon lamps, led, cfl, tungsten bulb, sodium vapour lamp,

--------------------
Activity 
Use dimmer switch see varying light intensity in a bulb. 
Note down the voltage, amperage and power of common devices.
Use a digital voltmeter to measure voltages.


--------------------
How does the human body produce energy from the food we eat?
Universal law of gravitation
Coloumb's law and the concept of free electrons and positive ions.
What is meant by combustion ? 

Usage of 'per unit ' and 'of unit' in definitions:
Power is the work done per unit interval of time.
Resistivity is the resistance of a conductor of unit length and unit area of cross section. 
