Content-Type: text/x-zim-wiki
Wiki-Format: zim 0.4
Creation-Date: 2019-04-10T18:24:08+05:30

====== Wave motion ======
Created Wednesday 10 April 2019

What is a wave?
What causes a wave? 
What are transverse and longitudinal waves?
How can we represent wave motion mathematically both at a particular instant as well as at a particular location?
What is a sound wave? 
Explain the production and transmission of sound.
What are the properties that characterize a particular wave?  On what factors does these properties depend? 
What is meant by the natural frequency of an object? 
What is meant by resonance?
What is meant by the reflection of a wave? State the law of reflection in the case of sound.
What is meant by the persistence of audibility? 
Explain multiple reflection, echo, reverberation in the case of sound. 
What is meant by echolocation? 
Explain the applications of sound waves employed in the acoustics of buildings.
What are seismic waves?
What are some examples of sound with a single frequency? 
What is the range of frequencies to which our ears are sensitive? 
What are some of the applications of infrasonic and ultrasonic waves in nature and in technology?

--------------------
What is a wave? What causes a wave? 
A wave is the propogation of a disturbance that moves in a periodic fashion.
A wave is caused by vibrations generated by a source. It travels through a medium.
All waves transport energy in some form.

A sound wave is caused by the periodic variation of the density or pressure of the air through which the wave is passing.
What is the medium of propogation of some common waves? Do all waves require a medium to travel? 
How are compressions and rarefactions made when sound travels? 

Amplitude is the maximum displacement of a particle (of the medium) from its mean position.
Time period is the time taken for 1 wave to pass through a particular point.
Frequency is the number of waves passing through a point in unit interval of time.
Wavelength is the distance between two consecutive particles which are in the same phase of vibration.
or the distance advanced by the wave in one complete vibration.
Speed of a wave is the distance travelled by the wave in unit interval of time. 

	f = 1/T 
	speed = frequency * wavelength

What are the factors that can affect the motion of sound through a medium? 
The speed of sound waves depends on the compressibility and inertia of the medium. 
If the medium has a bulk modulus B  and density ρ , the speed of sound waves in that medium is √ (B/ρ)
compare this expression with  the speed of  transverse waves on a string. The bulk modulus is related to the compressibility of the medium.
 In fact, the speed of all mechanical waves follows an expression of the general form
	v = √(elastic property/inertial property)
The speed of sound also depends on the temperature of the medium.


Problems

Have you seen a wave created by spectators in an auditorium as they move up and down ? What kind of wave is that?
If an alarm clock is placed in a glass chamber and activated and the chamber is connected to a vacuum pump which slowly removes the air from the chamber, what will you observe? 
Why is the thunderclap heard long after the lightning is observed?
1. Suppose that you hear a clap of thunder 16.2 s after seeing the associated lightning stroke. The speed of sound waves in air is 343 m/s, and the speed of light in air is 3.00 x 10^8 m/s. How far are you from the lightning stroke?  Ans: 5.56 km
2. Find the speed of sound in mercury, which has a bulk modulus of approximately 2.80 x 10^10 N/m2 and a density of 13 600 kg/m3.
3. A flower pot is knocked off a balcony 20.0 m above the sidewalk and falls toward an unsuspecting 1.75-m-tall man who is standing below. How close to the sidewalk can the flower pot fall before it is too late for a shouted warning from the balcony to reach the man in time? Assume that the man below requires 0.300 s to respond to the warning.
--------------------

How does humidity affect the density of air (or the medium) ?
Water molecules (H2O, molecular weight 18) actually weigh less than oxygen or nitrogen molecules (which are O2, molecular weight around 32, and N2, molecular weight 28). Air is primarily nitrogen and oxygen. Each water molecule in the air displaces one molecule of "air". Consequently, the more humid the air, actually the less dense the air becomes - which some people think odd, but there we are. - Richard Miller, Addlestone, UK
https://www.theguardian.com/notesandqueries/query/0,,-202025,00.html

How can we visualize reflection in the case of a longitudinal wave? 

https://brilliant.org/wiki/sound/
What is meant by the persistence of audibility? 
It has been found that the sensation of any sound lasts for of a second. This time is called the persistence of audibility or persistence of hearing. Thus, it is clear that if any sound reaches back to the ear in less than the mentioned time, we cannot make out when the original sound died and the reflected sound reached the ear. In other words, no echo is heard. But the observations is different in a contrary situation. 

What are the conditions for formation of echoes?
The minimum distance between the source of sound and the reflecting body should be  17m  normally because the speed of sound in air is normally 332m/s.
The wavelength of sound should be less than the height of the reflecting body.
The intensity of sound should be sufficient enough that it can be heard after reflection. 

1. Find the minimum distance of an obstacle for an echo to be heard if the medium is air and the speed of sound is 340m/s.
2. What should be the minimum distance between the source and reflecting surface in water to identify the echo?  
3. What are the principles on which SONARs work? 

--------------------

Illustration
Resonance - Tachoma Narrows bridge
Reverberating sound
oscilloscope apps

Activity
Verify the law of reflection of sound.

References:
1. Halliday and Resnick 2007 Extended Edition
2. College Physics by Rice University
3. https://science.howstuffworks.com/sound-info2.ht[[https://science.howstuffworks.com/sound-info2.htm|m]]
